Manage agitation. Look for reversible causes (pain, dehydration, urinary retention). Use an antipsychotic agent (eg haloperidol) to manage agitated delirium (see tables 11.6, 11.7). Try a benzodiazepine such as midazolam if there is a large element of anxiety. Opioids should not be used to sedate a dying patient. Seek early advice from palliative care if agitation is escalating or a significant problem.

Manage excessive secretions. Noise is generated by turbulent air flow and pooling of saliva in the hypopharynx. This may be more distressing for relatives and staff than the patient. There is little evidence that pharmacological agents are beneficial, though they are commonly used. Repositioning and intermittent suctioning may help. If you think the patient is distressed, consider a trial of an antisecretory drug (glycopyrronium or hyoscine butylbromide: see tables 11.6, 11.7).

Hydration. Many patients approaching the end of life are unable to eat/drink or have a very poor appetite for food/fluid. Helping to take sips and good mouth care may suffice. Fluid via non-oral routes (NG, SC, IV) is given for symptomatic benefit; the effect on survival is unknown. Any potential benefit must be weighed against the risk of symptomatic fluid overload. Discuss this with patients and families, explaining the pros and cons of hydration and the uncertainty of the effect of hydration on survival:23 relatives may assume the patient is dying faster because of dehydration or that they will be suffering with thirst. Make decisions about giving fluids on a case-by-case basis. Review a patient's hydration status at least daily.

Plan for death. Ensure that a 'Do not attempt resuscitation' or 'Allow natural death', order has been made. Discuss this with the patient (where appropriate), their family, and/or others of importance to them. Document everything clearly. Do they want to die at home? This can usually be arranged at very short notice with help from district nursing teams and community palliative care. Discuss transfer to a hospice or nursing home if appropriate.

Respond to changes in the clinical situation. Patients who are thought to be at the end of their life occasionally improve. Be alert to signs of improvement, and be prepared to switch back to active treatment when appropriate.

Communicate.23 The importance of clear and regular written and verbal communication with dying patients and their families cannot be overemphasized. Find out what is important to your patient. How much information do they know and want to know about their situation and prognosis? Be sensitive to social, religious, and cultural issues.

## On wanting to die

Physician-assisted suicide is the provision of drugs by a doctor for self-administration by a person to terminate their own life. This is distinct from euthanasia where a doctor administers the lethal drug. There have been repeated attempts to introduce physician-assisted dying (physician-assisted suicide only of the terminally ill) into UK law, but all have been rejected by Parliament.

Consider autonomy. Should competent patients have the right to determine their death, especially if their situation is unbearable, without prospect of improvement? It is a powerful argument. But bearable is subjective and prognosis is an inexact science. And beneficence is divided: is it merciful, or is it abandonment, to end suffering through death? And what of consent? Consent is key. Yet consent is complex. Could a legal process help? Not without a unique understanding of each patient and the means by which they experience life. A combination of law and medicine may offer false comfort without full accountability by either. Protection for the vulnerable is a valid concern for doctors and society.

Requests to hasten death are complex and include personal, psychological, spiritual, social, cultural, and demographic factors. ~10% of terminally ill patients will consider euthanasia or physician-assisted suicide. These wishes may or may not be fixed, with ~50% of patients changing their mind within 6 months. Discuss this. Ask your patient how they feel today and what they are afraid of feeling tomorrow. Listen. Answer questions. Offer palliative care. Palliative care is never futile. A wish to die is associated with a need for information, reassurance, and competence in symptom control. Provide these, or find someone who can.