# What is life?

By convention, life is anything which is organic and converts nutrients into prog-
eny. Failure to meet this definition means non-living, dead, dying, or perhaps male.
Life is a thing of dynamism, fragility, beauty, danger, and evanescence; gushing
forth from a single source. But here the certainties end: what does it really take
to be alive? Are viruses and prions living? How many branches are there on our
tree? The harder we look, the more complexities we find. The Hillis plot is a circular
phylogenetic tree, and a representation of humanity's place in nature. We are duly
humbled by this challenge to our imagined self-importance, reminding us that we
do not in reality occupy a privileged position in the hierarchy of the living, just a
unique subunit RNA sequence (fig 9.2).

Fig 9.2 Tree of life based on subunit RNA sequences sampled from ~3000 species out of the 1.7 million species that are formally named. The image on the right is a close up of the 'animal' segment of the diagram (upper left quadrant) showing 'You are here'.

Copyright David M. Hillis, Derrick Zwickl and Robin Gutell, University of Texas.
http://www.zo.utexas.edu/faculty/antisense/downloadfilesToL.html

Because micro-organisms kill our friends we think of them as bad:
> 'I have no philosophy, nor piety, no art of reflection, no theory of compensa-
> tion to meet things so hideous, so cruel, and so mad, they are just unspeak-
> ably horrible and irremediable to me and I stare at them with angry and
> almost blighted eyes.'
> 
> Henry James, 1915, describing the death of Rupert Brooke from septicaemia.

But this is a mistake. Kill off micro-organisms and the whole show fizzles out.
Micro-organisms gave us the DNA and organelles needed for reading and digesting
this page. Even killing a single pathogen might be a mistake: Sod's Law will prob-
ably ensure that something worse will come to inhabit the vacated ecospace. Prod
one part of the system and events ripple out in an unending stream of unintended
consequences, played out under the stars, which themselves are evolving, and
which donate and receive our primordial elements.

Can we win against infectious diseases? No. But winning or losing is the wrong
image: infectious diseases have made us who we are. All we can do is live with
them. To help us do this in ways that are not too destructive we need robust
public health surveillance, sound vector-control policies, political will, quarantine
laws, openness, and cooperation. Most importantly, do not underestimate the
importance of maintaining our infectious cohabitants in their apparent subor-
dinate position. The speed and capacity for learning by ribonucleic malware and
single-celled organisms is amazing. So do not inadvertently teach them. Preserve
your precious warfare tactics. Expose them to antibiotic therapies only in a
stand-off situation from which they cannot return to fight again.