# A sense of humourism

Whilst our understanding of blood has changed emphatically with the advent of medical research, its importance in health and disease is a common theme throughout human history and culture. Hippocrates (460-370BC) first described the four bodily fluids, or humours (Latin umor = body fluid): blood, phlegm, and yellow and black bile. This is not bile and phlegm as we know it; rather, it was postulated by Fahråeus (1921, the Swedish physician who pioneered the ESR, p372) that humourism arose from watching blood coagulate in vitro: distilling into layers of bilious yellow serum floating on a scurf of white cells, with the dark red-black clot of erythrocytes lurking in the depths of the sample.

These four humours were later elaborated by Roman physician, surgeon, and philosopher Claudius Galen (c.129-c.201AD) who attributed physical and behavioural traits to each humour: sanguine people are warm hearted and confident, the phlegmatic practical and rational, those with a choleric nature are fiery and passionate, while the melancholic (melas=black, khole=bile) are depressed yet creative.¹ It was thought that an imbalance of any of these elements was the source of disease, a belief which led to the wide-scale recommendation of the removal of the excess bodily fluid: expectoration, purging, and most popularly, blood-letting. William Harvey, Sydenham, and Dupytren are among the famous names who celebrated this cure, Harvey stating that 'daily experience satisfies us that blood-letting has a most salutary effect in many diseases, and is indeed the foremost among all the general remedial means'. Many tools were developed to aid this procedure, notably a collecting bowl with a convenient notch for the antecubital fossa or neck: the predecessor of the modern kidney dish.

Such was the conviction of the healing brought about by bloodletting that 'haematomania' reigned despite a suspicious degree of mortality. Indeed, it may have even killed inaugural US president George Washington in 1799: on developing laryngitis he was enthusiastically bled four times by his personal physician, and died 24 hours after symptom onset.

Eventually, the credibility of this practice waned, and by 1860 it had virtually disappeared. However, venesection still plays an important role in the management of haemachromatosis (see p288) and polycythaemia rubra vera (p366).

Fig 8.2 A normal blood film, with a neutrophil, red cells, and platelets (arrows).

¹ Compare these personalities with those of the 2015 anthropomorphic Pixar film 'Inside Out'.