# Food mountains, the pellagra paradox, and the sorrow that weeping cannot symbolize

'The sweet smell is a great sorrow on the land. Men who can graft the trees and make the seed fertile and big can find no way to let the hungry people eat their produce ... The works of the roots of the vines, of the trees, must be destroyed to keep up the price ...

There is a crime here that goes beyond denunciation. There is a sorrow here that weeping cannot symbolize. There is a failure here that topples all our success. The fertile earth, the straight tree rows, the sturdy trunks, and the ripe fruit. And children dying of pellagra must die because a profit cannot be taken from an orange. And coroners must fill in the certificates—died of malnutrition—because the food must rot, must be forced to rot.

The people come with nets to fish for potatoes in the river, and the guards hold them back; they come in rattling cars to get the dumped oranges, but the kerosene is sprayed. And they stand still and watch the potatoes float by, listen to the screaming pigs being killed in a ditch and covered with quicklime, watch the mountains of oranges slop down to a putrefying ooze; and in the eyes of the people there is a failure; and in the eyes of the hungry there is a growing wrath. In the souls of the people the grapes of wrath are filling and growing heavy, growing heavy for the vintage.' (J Steinbeck The Grapes of Wrath)

How do John Steinbeck's grapes grow in our 21st-century soil? Too well; a double harvest, it turns out, as not only is much of the world starving, amid plenty (for those who can pay) but also there is a new 'sorrow in our land that weeping cannot symbolize': pathological 'voluntary' self-starvation, again amid plenty, in pursuit of the body-beautiful according to images laid down by media gods. If gastroenterologists had one wish it might not be the ending of all their diseases, but that humankind stand in a right relationship with Steinbeck's fertile earth, his straight trees, his sturdy trunks, and his ripe fruit.