# What Becomes of the Broken Hearted? 145

> 'For who loveth extreamely, and feeleth not that passion to dissolve his hearte?
> Who rejoyceth, and proveth not his heart dilated?
> Who is moyled with heavinesse, or plunged with payne,
> and perceiveth not his heart to bee coarcted?
> Whom inflameth ire, and hath not heart-burning?
> By these experiences, wee prove in our hearts the working of Passions,
> and by the noyse of their tumult, wee understand the woorke of their presence'
> 
> Thomas Wright, The Passions of the Minde in Generall, 1604

From Aztec priests raising beating human hearts to the Sun-God, to heart metaphors in song lyrics today, ideas of links between the heart and human psychosocial self/soul/experience-of-being have pervaded the imaginative landscapes of cultures throughout time and place.

Some of these links relate to physiological changes associated with emotion-triggered adrenaline surges—'my heart raced', for example, is a phrase we relate to both physically and emotionally. Other heart-phrases result from poetic extrapolations of heart/self ideas and have no physiological explanation, eg 'he wears his heart on his sleeve'.

Evidence is building that heart/self interactions exist beyond metaphor and symptomatic 'flight-or-fight' responses. Affective disorders, certain personality types, and traumatic life-experiences increase the risk of cardiac disease, even when lifestyle factors are controlled for. In 'broken heart syndrome' (Takotsubo cardiomyopathy), ventricular contraction morphology changes in response to emotional or physical stress (fig 3.43). It mimics a myocardial infarction in terms of clinical history, ECG changes, and troponin rises, but the prognosis and management may be quite different so accurate diagnosis is important.

As physicians, we often focus on explainable physical aspects of disease, but the physical and psychosocial are inconveniently related and both should be assessed to determine best management. Should an IHD sufferer be offered CBT alongside their statins? Could a grieving patient's 'MI' be Takotsubo cardiomyopathy? To answer these questions we must look beyond ECGs and troponin, to the 'heart-ache' of the literary and philosophical kinds.

| (a) | (b) |
|-----|-----|
| Left ventriculogram of a heart in diastole. | The same patient's heart in systole. The apex is ballooning whilst the base contracts, causing inefficient pumping and a risk of rupture. This pattern is classic of Takotsubo cardiomyopathy. |

Fig 3.43 (a) Left ventriculogram of a heart in diastole. (b) The same patient's heart in systole. The apex is ballooning whilst the base contracts, causing inefficient pumping and a risk of rupture. This pattern is classic of Takotsubo cardiomyopathy.