## Method and order for routine examination

1. Look at the patient. Healthy, unwell, or in extremis? This vital skill improves with practice. Beware those who are sicker than they look, eg cardiogenic shock; cord compression; non-accidental injury.

2. Pulse, BP, RR, O2 sats, T°.

3. Examine nails, hands, conjunctivae (anaemia), and sclerae (jaundice). Consider: Paget's, acromegaly, endocrine disease (thyroid, pituitary, or adrenal hypo- or hyper-function), body hair, abnormal pigmentation, skin.

4. Examine mouth and tongue (cyanosed; smooth; furred; beefy, eg rhomboid area denuded of papillae by Candida, after prolonged steroid inhaler use).

5. Examine the neck from behind: lymph nodes, goitre.

6. Make sure the patient is at 45° to begin CVS examination in the neck: JVP; feel for character and volume of carotid pulse.

7. The praecordium. Look for abnormal pulsations. Feel the apex beat (character; position). Any parasternal heave or thrill? Auscultate (bell and diaphragm) apex in the left lateral position, then the other three areas (p39) and carotids. Sit the patient forward: listen during expiration.

8. While sitting forward, look for sacral oedema.

9. Respiratory examination with the patient at 90°. Observe (and count) RR; note posterior chest wall movement. Assess chest expansion, percuss and auscultate.

10. Sit the patient back. Feel the trachea. Inspect again. Assess expansion of the anterior chest. Percuss and auscultate again.

11. Examine axillae and breasts, if indicated (chaperone for all intimate examinations).

12. Lie patient flat (1 pillow) to inspect, palpate, percuss, and auscultate abdomen.

13. Look at the legs: swellings, perfusion, pulses, or oedema? Pitting? What level?

14. CNS exam: Cranial nerves: pupil responses; fundi; visual fields; visual acuity. Consider corneal reflexes. 'Open your mouth; stick your tongue out; screw up your eyes; show me your teeth; raise your eyebrows.' Limbs (most signs are due to central not peripheral nerve lesions): look for wasting and fasciculation. Test tone in all limbs. 'Hold your hands out with your palms towards the ceiling and fingers wide. Now shut your eyes.' Watch for pronator drift. 'Keep your eyes shut and touch your nose with each index finger.' 'Lift your leg straight in the air. Keep it there. Put your heel on the opposite knee (eyes shut) and run it up your own shin.' You have now tested power, coordination, and joint position sense. Tuning fork on toes and index fingers to assess vibration sense.

15. Examine gait and speech. Any abnormalities of higher mental function?

16. Consider rectal and vaginal examination (chaperone essential).

17. Examine the urine with dipstick if appropriate.

In general, go into detail where you find (or suspect) something to be wrong.