# I think, therefore I am

It is the brain, more than any other organ, that marks *Homo sapiens* apart from other animals. Our ability to be self-aware, to think, and to reason has formed the basis of scientific inquiry and philosophical speculation for millennia, as we attempt to rationalize and define this cognitive capability. What is the mind? Less tangible than other aspects of our being, throughout time humans have looked to explanations from philosophy, folklore, religion, and now science. The concept of the sense of self and being that defines us all—whether it be called the ego, nous, or the soul—remains intriguing yet elusive to explain. Aristotle held that the psyche (Greek: ψυχή=soul) was not separate to its housing body, as one could not exist without the other. This view was directly contradicted by the 17th-century French philosopher René Descartes. He proposed the theory of 'mind-body dualism' in which the mind, located in the pineal gland, is an entirely separate entity to the material being, and controls the avatar of the physical body like a puppeteer.

These conflicting viewpoints well illustrate the spectrum of neurological disease and its blurred boundaries with psychiatry and psychology. Jean Martin Charcot (1825-1893), often credited as the father of neurology, appeared to be more interested in this crossover than neuronal dysfunction: he spent two decades of his career studying hysteria in Paris, initially attributing symptoms of crying, fainting, and temporary blindness to an organic, inherited cause, before revising his view in later life to conclude that this was a psychological disease. His controversial work in this field inspired his student Sigmund Freud's psychoanalytical theories, and illustrated the very real power of the conscious, or sub-conscious, to produce physical symptoms, a phenomenon familiar to all physicians. Perhaps reflecting our frustration with this challenging area as much as his limited success, we remember Charcot for his more tangible outputs, for example, in giving the inaugural description of, among other things, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, and of course his eponymous misshapen joint resulting from proprioceptive loss.

However, both Aristotle and Charcot would have surely agreed with Descartes' proposition of 'cogito ergo sum': I think, therefore I am. Whether mind and brain are dual or one, they are inextricably linked and the very nature of awareness proves its existence.