# Testing for autoantibodies—the anguish of partial understanding

The diagnostic approach to several inflammatory conditions includes the measurement of autoantibodies. Consequently and all too often, attempts to acquire (and test) medical knowledge may promote these antibody panels to a position as the final arbiter of disease diagnosis which, with their varying sensitivities and specificities, they are quite unfit to assume. Indeed, often just such a work-up shows strange overlap conditions between apparently different diseases: strange until we realize that these markers are just surrogates for processes that we lack a complete aetiological explanation for and in which the antibodies themselves may just be bystanders. Process that we lack the tools to visualize, as cells of the immune system continue their onslaught against their perceived enemies, driven by reasons that none present seem willing to reveal to our crude probing with blood tests, X-rays and biopsies. While the body knows no diseases, only pain and death, our minds attempt to impose a unitary disease on unsuspecting and sometimes innocent cells.

For example, clinically we observe that autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) frequently overlaps with PSC and IBD. A battery of antibody tests may sometimes help understand the dominant process, but equally may mystify matters still further if we attempt to apply our inadequate classifiers ('But why is the ANCA not positive?' cries the student, enraged at the failure of the miserable patient's B lymphocytes to do the honourable thing). As ever, management should be individualized dependent on liver and bowel histology, serum immunoglobulin levels, the degree of biochemical cholestasis, cholangiography, and, yes, autoantibodies.

| Fig 6.30 ERCP showing many strictures in the biliary tree with a characteristic 'beaded' appearance. | Fig 6.31 MRCP showing features of PSC. The intrahepatic ducts show multifocal strictures. Strictures can be hard to differentiate from cholangiocarcinoma (coexistence of UC may promote this development). Stenting may be needed. |
|---|---|
| © Dr Anthony Mee. | ©Norwich Radiology Department. |