# Psychiatric symptoms

There are many different ways to think about psychiatric symptoms. One simple approach can be to consider negative and positive symptoms. *Negative symptoms* involve the absence of a behaviour, thought, feeling, or sensation (eg lack of appetite, apathy, and blunted emotions in depression), whereas *positive symptoms* involve their presence when not normally expected (eg thought insertion, ie 'Someone is putting thoughts into my head'). Understanding the difference between psychosis and neurosis is vital. *Psychosis* entails a thought disorder (eg thought insertion, thought broadcasting) ± delusions (abnormal beliefs which are held to despite all reasoning, and which run counter to the patient's cultural background) and abnormal perceptions (eg hallucinations). *Neurosis* entails insight—if there are intrusive ideas or odd experiential phenomena, the person knows that they are false or illusory (and may be triggered by stress, etc.).

Disorders of thought include *flight of ideas*, in which the speech races through themes, switching whimsically or through associations, eg 'clang' association: 'Yesterday I went down to the local shop. I didn't hop (clang), but I walked. Kangaroos hop, don't they? My friend Joey wasn't there, though...'. *Knight's move* is an unexpected change in the direction of speech or conversation (akin to the lateral component of the move of the knight's piece in chess) and *neologism* is the formation of new words. They may be normal or indicate an organic brain condition or a psychosis.

Many psychiatric symptoms in isolation, to a lesser degree of severity, or even in a different culture, may well be considered part of 'normal' behaviour. For example, a vision from a religious figure may be considered normal, whereas one from an alien may not. Consider your patient in their cultural and religious context. As with so many aspects of medicine, in psychiatry there is a vast spectrum of behaviour, thought, and perception, at least one extreme of which is considered to be 'abnormal'. It is in part our challenge to attempt to interpret these symptoms with relevance, insight, and impartiality so that we may best benefit our patients and not form opinions that are set in stone. On acute medical wards psychiatric symptoms are often due to stress, drug or alcohol withdrawal, U&E imbalance, or medication. When in doubt, ask a psychiatrist to help.

Beware of simplistic formulations, eg If you talk to God, you are praying. If God talks to you, you have schizophrenia (Dr Thomas Szasz). It is not the auditory phenomenon that makes the diagnosis of psychosis: what matters is what the patient believes about the phenomenon, and whether they are associated with a thought disorder or a delusion.